Let's first take a close look at this sudoku puzzle. [insert lesson01-1.jpg here]

Initially it seems that not a single number can be find out quickly using basic methods, unless to use full candidates and reduce them systematically and find out a naked single - but that won't help much for the remaining solution.

Sudoku puzzle can be solved creatively by looking at the special formation of its number positions. In this example, if we observe that in the first box there are only two possible positions for 9: R2C3 and R1C1. [insert lesson01-2.jpg here] If 9 were in R2C3, it would trigger a chain reaction - this can be even look ahead intuitively, and after merely five steps, we would quickly know that there would be a conflict for 9. [insert lesson01-3.jpg here] By the logic of proof by contradiction, 9 can NOT be in R2C3, then 9 must be in R1C1. [insert lesson01-4.jpg here] After this determination, the puzzle is downgraded to a much simpler one and can be solved directly using basic rules. By identifying a "chain trigger", it is a basic idea of solving sudoku puzzles systematically using the "inferential binary tree" method (below we use "ibtree" as an abbreviation). 

Had a player decided to use common method of candidate reduction method (below we use "canred" as an abbreviation), the player need to spend considerable effort to search for a "sashimi swordfish" pattern of 9s to eliminate the 9 at R2C3. The reason of utilizing "sashimi swordfish" as a acceptable theorem is based on the logical proof of "sashimi swordfish", which is exactly based on the proof by contradiction. (picture). 

Comparing these two modes of solving process, it elicits a realization that they are operating in two distinct thinking processes: ibtree method allows player to focus on the puzzle's structure opportunity to generate a "chain reaction" to leverage as much information as possible, thus it either prove or disprove this chioce in certain circumstances; canred method requires player to rigorously apply various basic and advanced methods to reduce the number candidates in order to eventually identify a naked single or hidden single after certain rounds of candidate reduction, where the primary focus is to answer what number is NOT possible in specific cells. 

While ibtree method is inherently opportunistic (the player either picks the one in the right path, which eventuall leads to the one and only one solution, or picks the wrong one that eventually get disapproved), it is not a guessing game - it is still rigorously based on rules of logic - proof by contradiction. In addition, ibtree method can assist player find solve the sudoku puzzle much faster in most cases due to its opportunistic nature, which is the ideal choice in a time-constraints setting such as sudoku tournaments.

The reason we call it a "binary tree" [create a tree diagram based on lesson01-2.jpg, lesson01-3.jpg, and lesson01-6.jpg] is because this method help us to construct a dynamic solution tree and use "proof by contradiction" to prune the sub-branch if it is proved false. 