Some of our sudoku players gave us feedback that the example presented in the lesson 01 might be a rare case. In this lesson, we want to share another puzzle that exhibits similar magic. [insert lesson02-1.jpg here]

After initial examination, it seems that we can quickly confirm two 6's in the Box 3 and Box 4, which are helpful but not too much. Let's sharpen our focus and apply ibtree method to find out some of the structural opportunity in the grid. Indeed we can see a similar pattern of two-way fork of 7 in the Box 5 (central box), and the two possible candidate positions look like a knight move (borrowed from chess terminology), which is one of high-valued selection in the context of ibtree method. [insert lesson02-2.jpg here]. One of the key techniques in ibtree methodology is "chain trigger": we might personally believe that 7 in R4C6 is the correct, but placing it as a candidate would not yield any additional clues; in contrast, the 7 in R6C5 act as a "chain trigger", it trigger a chain of reaction based on the particular formation of given clues. The value of the chain trigger is that it adequately utilize the information of existing (and so far solved) clues, thus unravel the potential conflict in other places. [insert lesson02-3.jpg here] This is another aha moment, if you change your mental focus, you might be able to perform this visual check without actually writing down the subsequent candidate number - indeed 7 can NOT be in R6C5 because it yields a conflict down the road. [insert lesson02-4.jpg here]

After confirming 6 must be in R4C6, [insert lesson02-5.jpg here] the puzzle itself is downgraded to a moderate level. Any experienced player can solve the rest of the puzzle by applying the basic rules of sudoku with minimum effort. [insert lesson02-6.jpg here]

This is truly the power of proof by contradiction. Had the player used the "standard" canred method to rigorously perform candidate reduction, the player need a finned swordfish pattern and a sashimi swordfish pattern to eliminate certain critical candidates in order to make progress. while the names of "finned swordfish" and "sashimi swordfish" may sound exotic and fancy, they are merely pre-packaged proof by contradiction and act as interim theorems to be utilized in the process of candidate reduction. 

The power of ibtree method lies in the fact that it constructs a dynamic real-time decision tree in which a sub-branch is aggressively pruned the moment it is mathematically proven false. We must acknowledge that ibtree method requires sudoku players to change mindset and mental focus a little bit to pay attention to the number formation in order to creatively pick the right chain trigger. [create a binary tree diagram based on lesson02-2.jpg, lesson02-3.jpg and lesson02-7.jpg]. 

 

 