In the first six lessons, we witnessed the magic moments that ibtree method can greatly simplify the solving steps of extreme sudoku puzzles by testing "chain trigger" digit (out of 2 or 3 options within a box) that eventually leads to a contradiction. But what contradiction exactly? Any valid classic sudoku puzzle has a hidden assumption: it has one and only one solution. It is a muted point that any conflict would not lead to the path to the one and only one solution.

But before hand we do not know the "chain trigger" we selected would lead to a contradiction. As a matter of fact, we would have 50 percent chance that the digit we want to test is actually the correct digit. If that is the case, we just finish the puzzle if possible and verify it is the solution. 

Let's take a look at this puzzle. [insert lesson07-1.jpg here]. Initially we can fill in a lot of digits by applying cross-hatching quick and easy. Once we get 1/R6C9 out, we should intuitively identify a naked pair 1-7 in Box 5 without resorting to canred (candidate reduction method). In ibtree method, [insert lesson07-2.jpg here] we want to give it a different name as "confined group", it could be 2, 3, or even 4 digits sometimes, to limit the freedom of choice for the remaining cells within the box or line it occupy. 

In the Box 3, there are two possible choices for 2, we notice that 2/R1C7 is more interesting and can lead to a chain reaction. As the initial trial lead to a finished Box 6 without conflict so far. [insert lesson07-3.jpg]. Further down the road, we notice Box 2 has two possible choice for 7 while Box 5 already confined a 1-7 group, which forming a (vertically) parallel control of 7. [insert lesson07-4.jpg here]

By the similar argument of x-wing, we know that in Box 8, the digit 7 must reside in Column 4, then by adding horizontal constraints, we can confirm 7/R9C4. [insert lesson07-5.jpg here]. As we continue moving on, we get additional digits for Box 7. [insert lesson07-6.jpg here]. Finally we fill-in all the digits for the puzzle with the assumption of 2/R1C7. We just need to double-check the validity of the digits.

We do not need to count every boxes and every lines from 1 to 9. Here a quick and valid method: we start with 2/R1C7 and use the solution number (convert it from trial pencil digit) to fill-in and go around the board, clockwise or counter-clockwise, (e.g. fill-in and verify digit 2 from Box 3, 6, 9, 8, 7, 4, 1, 2, then finally verify 2 in the Box 5 horizontally and vertically). If there is no conflict or error, then we repeat remaining digits. Finally we can reach our ultimate solution - the logic is that if every Box has every digit exactly once and being verified horizontally and vertically, then it must be valid answer.

