In the previous lessons, we presented two sudoku puzzles that exhibit structural opportunities for forming a binary decision tree, in which one position of the number acts as chain trigger that greatly utilize existing position and information of other number to quickly reach a contradiction - thus confirm the number should be in the other position. 

This example is slightly different. [insert lesson03-1.jpg here] After initial examination, we can quickly confirm a few numbers along with a naked pair, which would help determining other number is R2 down the line. Other than that, there are really no interesting candidate pairs in a particular box that can trigger a long chain of reaction. But, wait... [insert lesson03-2.jpg here]. 

In Box 7, there are 3 potential positions for 9 that makes a three-way fork of a decision tree structure. Conceptually it can be restructured as a binary tree easily. nonetheless two of the positions can indeed trigger different chain reactions. First let's consider 9/R9C3, [insert lesson03-3.jpg here], after a quick run of applying basic sudoku rules in box 1, 4, and 7, the conflict is so obvious, [insert lesson03-4.jpg here], thus 9 can not be in R9C3. Similarly if we assume 9/R8C3, [insert lesson03-5.jpg here] after a few steps, [insert lesson03-6.jpg here] we can see a conflict in the box 4, which gives us proof by contradiction that 9 can not be in R8C3. Combining these two findings, 9 must be in R8C1. [insert lesson03-7.jpg here]. 

Once 9 is determined in the box 7, the puzzle is significantly reduced to a moderate level, which can be solved directly down to the end. [insert lesson03-8.jpg here] So the observation and intuition to restructure the three-way fork as a binary tree indeed paid off greatly. [create a inferential binary tree of two layers for determining 9's position in the box 7]. 

Had the player opted to solve this puzzle using standard canred method (candidate reduction), the player need to spend considerable time to apply several advanced techniques to eliminate some critical candidates. These advanced techniques include swordfish (twice), 3D medusa (three times) and alternating inference chain. In the common difficulty rating, this sudoku puzzle is rated as "Hell" (level 9), with hoduku value of 2216, and SE value of 7.2. 